---
layout: post
title: Concepts
visible: true
---

`laika` is a combination of technologies including `phantomjs`, `mocha`, `meteor` itself, ands ome tricks. In this section you'll be learning how laika works internally. It will help you write better tests and understand why laika is a bit slower than other testing frameworks.

## Testing with the actual app
`laika` doesn't do mocking or stubbing. Your tests will be tested against your actual Meteor app and using real browsers (`phantomjs` in this case). `laika`'s focus is on writing tests for both the client and server. We don't need to build another test suite, so we use [`mocha`](http://visionmedia.github.io/mocha/) internally.

## Each test will run on its own app and a separate database
Best thing about laika is, each test will run against a separate process of your app and with a clean database. This is really good since your tests are **isolated** from each another. It's a bit slower, but we've sped things up in a few ways:

* Fast mongod process with these options - `mongod --smallfiles --noprealloc --nojournal`
* Pooling apps so you don't need to wait for the app to get loaded
* Running `mongod` on a ramdisk - [see this guide](using-ram-disk.html)

There are some other ways to increase the speed, but not yet tested:

* Use parallel testing (`mocha` does not support this, and writing a test suite from the ground up is not cool)

## The server and your test communicate via a TCP connection

* At the beginning of the test, `laika` will inject a [code block](https://github.com/arunoda/laika/blob/master/lib/injector/templates/server.js) that runs on the server into your Meteor app
* When your app starts, it will start a TCP connection so your test can communicate with the server
* The test sends its code over TCP and the injected code will `eval()` it
* The result of the `eval()` is sent back via TCP (using `emit()`, which you've seen in the Getting Started guide)

## Client code is evaluated in a real browser

* We use [`phantomjs`](http://phantomjs.org/) for this. It's a headless browser (meaning no graphical interface is required), based on WebKit.
* Your test code will be evaluated on the client with phantomjs's [`evaluate()`](https://github.com/ariya/phantomjs/wiki/API-Reference-WebPage#wiki-webpage-evaluate) method and by injecting a small [piece of code](https://github.com/arunoda/laika/blob/master/lib/injector/templates/client.js) into your meteor app.

## All the injected code will be removed

* Injected code can be used to exploit your app in production
* But don't worry - we'll remove it after the test
* You can check that with  `git diff` :)
